# Data Availability
* [Expand](expand-or-collapse-cedar-form-section.md) the Data Availability form section
* Many of the fields in the Data Availability section will/may need to be updated as a HEAL study moves through its life-cycle (e.g. a field called "data collection status" will start at "not started" and move through "started" to end up at "finished")
* The Platform will provide access to a re-visitable portal on the Platform that will allow investigators to update metadata fields that will/may need to be updated as a HEAL study moves through its life-cycle. <mark>If you need to update metadata fields from the CEDAR form before this portal is available, please reach out to the Platform Help Desk at heal-support@datacommons.io for assistance.</mark> 
* The Data Availability form section has ten fields (<mark>click below to expand guidance for each field</mark>):
 
    <li> <details><summary>**Will the study collect or produce data? Yes/No**</summary><blockquote>
    <li> <details><summary>**How to answer**</summary><blockquote>
        Not all HEAL studies will collect or produce data. For example, some studies will do the ‘pre-work’ of developing methods and protocols for later use by future studies that will implement and collect data using that developed protocol. If your study will NOT collect or produce **data**, but will produce shareable products other than data (e.g. protocols, slide decks, etc.) please answer “No” to this question and “Yes” to a later question in this section that asks if your study will produce shareable products other than data. 
    </blockquote></details>
    </li>
    <li> <details><summary>**How this field will be used**</summary><blockquote>
        This field will allow Platform users that are specifically looking for study data that may be useful for their purposes to filter down to studies that will collect or produce data, and filter out those studies that will not collect or produce data. <mark>This field may also be used by the Platform to flag studies for outreach to HEAL investigators based on their answers to provide data sharing support and extend data collaboration invitations.</mark> 
    </blockquote></details>
    </li>    
    </blockquote></details>
    </li>
    
    <details><summary>**Will the study make data available? None/Some/All**</summary>

    * **How to answer:** <mark>This field ONLY APPLIES if you answered “Yes” to “Will the study collect or produce data?”</mark> If your study does not plan to make any of the data you collect or produce available in a HEAL approved data repository, select “None” (while most HEAL studies are obligated by the terms of their award to share data, this may apply to select HEAL studies – e.g. SBIR grants). If your study plans to make some data available, but not all (e.g. only data needed to reproduce publications, only processed data files, only extensively de-identified data, excluding certain data sets or sources used in your study such as administrative data when the DSA under which you obtained them does not allow sharing, etc.), select “Some”. If your study plans to make all data available to the greatest extent possible (e.g. sharing very close to raw clinical trial data in a data repository with strong access control mechanisms and subject to very strong access controls, including some features data that may be very useful for specific analysis but also pose a real risk of re-identification, such as highly granular geographic information, detailed diagnostic and care provision or utilization patterns, and/or clinician notes), select “All”.  
    * **How this field will be used:** This field will allow Platform users that are specifically looking for study data that may be useful for their purposes to filter down to studies that will share some or all of the data they collect or produce, and filter out those studies that will not share data. Some users, especially those who may be interested specifically in data features that represent substantial risk of re-identification in a dataset (e.g. high geographic granularity), may specifically want to filter down to studies that plan to share “All” data in order to filter out studies that will only share extensively de-identified data. <mark>This field may also be used by the Platform to flag studies for outreach to HEAL investigators based on their answers to provide data sharing support and extend data collaboration invitations.</mark> 
    
    </details>

    <details><summary>**Will available data have restrictions on access? None/Some/All**</summary>

    * **How to answer:**<mark>This field ONLY APPLIES if you answered “Yes” to “Will the study collect or produce data?” and you answered “Some” or “All” to “Will the study make data available?”</mark> If your study plans for all the data that it makes available in a data repository to be open access or very minimally restricted (i.e. available following signing of a minimal DUA that does not require any manual intervention or approval), then select “None”. If your study plans for some of the data that it makes available in a data repository to be open access or very minimally restricted (i.e. available following signing of a minimal DUA that does not require any manual intervention or approval), while some of the data that it makes available will be available only following a request and approval process that does require substantial manual intervention (e.g. submission of a project proposal and IRB approval by the requestor; review by a Data Access Committee on the repository end; etc.), then select “Some”. An example of a study that may choose this option is a clinical trial that will share both 1) an extensively de-identified dataset that is open access/minimal access controls, AND 2) a less de-identified dataset that includes features that add value for many analysis questions, but also present substantial risk for re-identification, that is shared via the repository under strict access controls. If your study plans for all of the data that it makes available in a data repository to be available only following a request and approval process that does require substantial manual intervention (e.g. submission of a project proposal and IRB approval by the requestor; review by a Data Access Committee on the repository end; etc.), then select “All”. An example of a study that may choose this option is a clinical trial that will ONLY share a less de-identified dataset that includes features that add value for many analysis questions, but also present substantial risk for re-identification, that is shared via the repository under strict access controls, and WILL NOT share a version of the data that is extensively de-identified as open access/minimal access controls. 

    * **How this field will be used:** This field will allow Platform users that are specifically looking for study data that may be useful for their purposes AND very easy to quickly access (e.g. because they want to execute a project quickly, perhaps prior to a newspaper article or proposal deadline) to filter down to studies that will share some or all of the data they collect or produce as open access/minimal access controls. <mark>This field may also be used by the Platform to flag studies for outreach to HEAL investigators based on their answers to provide data sharing support and extend data collaboration invitations.</mark> 
    
    </details>

    <details><summary>**Has data collection/production started? Not started/Started/Finished**</summary>

    * **How to answer:** <mark>This field ONLY APPLIES if you answered “Yes” to “Will the study collect or produce data?”</mark> If your study has not started collecting data at all, select “Not started”. If your study has multiple parts/aims, select this option if NO part/aim of your study has started collecting data. If your study has started collecting data but is not finished, select “Started”. If your study has multiple parts/aims, select this option if any part/aim of your study has started collecting data. If your study has finished collecting data, select “Finished”. If your study has multiple parts/aims, select this option if ALL parts/aims of your study have finished collecting data. This field will need to be updated as a HEAL study moves through its life-cycle - see [here for information on how to update.](update-cedar-form-metadata.md) 
    * **How this field will be used:** This field will allow Platform users that are specifically looking for study data that may be useful for their purposes to filter down to studies that are at different stages of data collection. Filtering to studies that are at later stages of data collection (e.g. “Started” or “Finished”) will allow Platform users to find studies that are closer to having data available for request by Platform users. This field will also allow Platform users that may not be interested in obtaining study data, but are interested solely in the findings/results of the study, to filter down to studies where it’s likely that a study publication with findings/results can be expected soon. <mark>This field may also be used by the Platform to flag studies for outreach to HEAL investigators based on their answers to provide data sharing support and extend data collaboration invitations AND by the NIH HEAL office to track HEAL data collection progress.</mark> 
    
    </details>
    
    <details><summary>**Has data release started? Not started/Started/Finished**</summary>
    
    * **How to answer:** <mark>This field ONLY APPLIES if you answered “Yes” to “Will the study collect or produce data?” AND you answered “Some” or “All” to “Will the study make data available?”</mark> If your study has not started making study data available via the data repository chosen for long-term data sharing purposes by the study, select “Not started”. If your study has multiple parts/aims, select this option if NO part/aim of your study has started making study data available via a data repository. If your study has started making study data available via the data repository chosen for long-term data sharing purposes by the study but is not finished (i.e. will share more data at a later date), select “Started”. If your study has multiple parts/aims, select this option if any part/aim of your study has started making study data available via a data repository. If your study has finished making study data available via the data repository chosen for long-term data sharing purposes by the study (i.e. there is not a plan to share any more data at a later date), select “Finished”. If your study has multiple parts/aims, select this option if all parts/aims of your study have finished making study data available via a data repository. This field will need to be updated as a HEAL study moves through its life-cycle - see [here for information on how to update.](update-cedar-form-metadata.md) 
    * **How this field will be used:** This field will allow Platform users that are specifically looking for study data that may be useful for their purposes to filter down to studies that are at different stages of data release. Filtering to studies that are at later stages of data release (e.g. “Started” or “Finished”) will allow Platform users to find studies that already have data available for request by Platform users, and are closer to having all study data available for request by Platform users.  This field will also allow Platform users that may not be interested in obtaining study data, but are interested solely in the findings/results of the study, to filter down to studies where it’s likely that a study publication with findings/results can be expected soon, if not already available. <mark>This field may also be used by the Platform to flag studies for outreach to HEAL investigators based on their answers to provide data sharing support and extend data collaboration invitations AND by the NIH HEAL office to track HEAL data release/sharing progress.</mark> 
    
    </details>

    <details><summary>**Date when first data will be collected/produced (Anticipated)**</summary>
    
    * **How to answer:** <mark>This field ONLY APPLIES if you answered “Yes” to “Will the study collect or produce data?”</mark> Please provide the **anticipated** date when data collection will start (e.g. first study participant enrolled in a clinical trial). Please provide the date in MM/dd/yyyy format - When you click into this field, a calendar icon will appear to the right of the field; click on this icon to pop out a calendar interface for selecting your date. This field may need to be updated if conditions arise that move up or delay anticipated date - see [here for information on how to update.](update-cedar-form-metadata.md)     
    * **How this field will be used:** This data collection start date will be available for viewing by Platform users on the study details page for each study indexed on the Platform. It will allow Platform users interested in accessing data or publications/findings from a study to get a sense for study timing, and for when data or publications/findings from the study may become available. <mark>This field may also be used by the Platform to flag studies for outreach to HEAL investigators based on their answers to provide data sharing support and extend data collaboration invitations AND by the NIH HEAL office to track HEAL data release/sharing progress.</mark>

    </details>

    <details><summary>**Date when last data will be collected/produced (Anticipated)**</summary>

    * **How to answer:** <mark>This field ONLY APPLIES if you answered “Yes” to “Will the study collect or produce data?”</mark> Please provide the **anticipated** date when data collection will be completed (e.g. last measurement on last study participant enrolled in a clinical trial). Please provide the date in MM/dd/yyyy format - When you click into this field, a calendar icon will appear to the right of the field; click on this icon to pop out a calendar interface for selecting your date. This field may need to be updated if conditions arise that move up or delay anticipated date - see [here for information on how to update.](update-cedar-form-metadata.md)     
    * **How this field will be used:** This data collection finish date will be available for viewing by Platform users on the study details page for each study indexed on the Platform. It will allow Platform users interested in accessing data or publications/findings from a study to get a sense for study timing, and for when data or publications/findings from the study may become available. <mark>This field may also be used by the Platform to flag studies for outreach to HEAL investigators based on their answers to provide data sharing support and extend data collaboration invitations AND by the NIH HEAL office to track HEAL data release/sharing progress.</mark>

    </details>

    <details><summary>**Date when first data will be released (Anticipated)**</summary>
    
    * **How to answer:** <mark>This field ONLY APPLIES if you answered “Yes” to “Will the study collect or produce data?” AND you answered “Some” or “All” to “Will the study make data available?”</mark> Please provide the **anticipated** date when data release will start (e.g. first dataset with accompanying metadata deposited in data repository). Please provide the date in MM/dd/yyyy format - When you click into this field, a calendar icon will appear to the right of the field; click on this icon to pop out a calendar interface for selecting your date. This field may need to be updated if conditions arise that move up or delay anticipated date - see [here for information on how to update.](update-cedar-form-metadata.md)     
    * **How this field will be used:** This data release start date will be available for viewing by Platform users on the study details page for each study indexed on the Platform. It will allow Platform users interested in accessing data or publications/findings from a study to get a sense for study timing, and for when data or publications/findings from the study may become available. <mark>This field may also be used by the Platform to flag studies for outreach to HEAL investigators based on their answers to provide data sharing support and extend data collaboration invitations AND by the NIH HEAL office to track HEAL data release/sharing progress.</mark>
    
    </details>

    <details><summary>**Date when last data will be released (Anticipated)**</summary>

    * **How to answer:** <mark>This field ONLY APPLIES if you answered “Yes” to “Will the study collect or produce data?” AND you answered “Some” or “All” to “Will the study make data available?”</mark> Please provide the **anticipated** date when data release will be complete (e.g. final dataset with accompanying metadata deposited in data repository; no more data deposits anticipated). Please provide the date in MM/dd/yyyy format - When you click into this field, a calendar icon will appear to the right of the field; click on this icon to pop out a calendar interface for selecting your date. This field may need to be updated if conditions arise that move up or delay anticipated date - see [here for information on how to update.](update-cedar-form-metadata.md)     
    * **How this field will be used:** This data release finish date will be available for viewing by Platform users on the study details page for each study indexed on the Platform. It will allow Platform users interested in accessing data or publications/findings from a study to get a sense for study timing, and for when data or publications/findings from the study may become available. <mark>This field may also be used by the Platform to flag studies for outreach to HEAL investigators based on their answers to provide data sharing support and extend data collaboration invitations AND by the NIH HEAL office to track HEAL data release/sharing progress.</mark>

    </details>

    <details><summary>**Will the study produce shareable products other than data? Yes/No**</summary>

    * **How to answer:** Regardless of whether your study will or will not collect or produce **data**, if your study will produce shareable products other than data (e.g. protocols, slide decks, data dictionaries etc.) please answer “Yes” to this question. 
    * **How this field will be used:** While the majority of HEAL studies produce data, and are required to share that data in some format, there are some studies that do the 'pre-work' for studies relevant to HEAL (e.g. protocol development) that do not collect data, and there are some studies (i.e. small business grant studies) that are not obligated to share data. This field will allow Platform users that are specifically 1) looking for non-data materials such as protocols developed by 'pre-work' HEAL-funded studies, and/or 2) interested in learning as much about studies that will not share data (sucy as small business grant studies) as possible, perhaps to explore the possibility of contacting the study leads to develop a collaborative relationship. <mark>This field may also be used by the Platform to flag studies for outreach to HEAL investigators based on their answers to provide support for sharing non-data study products.</mark>

    </details>

* Once complete, [collapse](expand-or-collapse-cedar-form-section.md) the Data Availability section (and [save](save-cedar-form.md) your form!)
    

        